README.md, before:

#Distributed Interactive Simulation: The Missing Handbook

1. <a href="DIS_Background.md">Intro</a>
   - DIS Background
   - DIS History
2. <a href="DoDModelingAndSimulationStandards.md">DOD Modeling and Simulation Standards</a>
	- DIS
	- HLA
	- TENA
	- What is standardized?
	- Philosophy: partial implementations of DIS abound
3. <a href="LiveVirtualConstructive.md">Live, Virutal, Constructive</a>
   - Example DIS applications
      - Situational awareness: maps
      - Simulation interoperability
      - Virtual Worlds
      - Analysis: Recording and Playback
4. <a href="VirtualWorldIssues.md">Virtual World Issues</a>
   	- <a href="CoordinateSystems.md">Coordinate Systems</a>
   	- <A href="EntityIdentifiers.md">Identifiers</a>
   	- <a href="Networks.md">Networks</a>
   	- <a href="Timestamps.md">Timestamps</a>
   	- <a href="Latency.md">Latency</a>
   	- <A href="EntityType.md">Semantics (Entity Type, etc)</a>
   	- <a href="EntityDiscovery.md">Entity Discovery</a>
   	- Scalability
   	- <A href="DeadReckoning.md">Dead Reckoning</a>
   	- <A href="Gateways.md">Gateways</a>
4. <a href="DISImplementations.md">DIS Implementations</a>
5. <a href="ExchangingStateInformation.md">PDUs: Exchanging State Information</a>
	- <A href="UDPSockets.md">UDP Socket Programming</a>
	- <a href="EntityStatePDUs.md">Sending State Updates with Entity State PDUs</a>
	- <a href="ReceivingPDUs.md">Receiving PDUs</a>
   - <a href="Combat.md">Combat: Fire and Detonation PDUs<a/>
   - Intercom: Voice Communications
   - Electronic Warfare
   - <a ref="PDUBundling.md">Bundled PDUs</a>
6. A Minimal DIS Networking Example
7. Technology
   - Web
      - Websockets
      - X3D
      - Unity
      - WebRTC

Commit message:

Some latency and DR work

README.md, after:

#Distributed Interactive Simulation: The Missing Handbook

Work in progress. Full of typos, not yet to first draft status, footnotes are a mess, prose is lousy, etc. 

1. <a href="DIS_Background.md">Intro</a>
   - DIS Background
   - DIS History
2. <a href="DoDModelingAndSimulationStandards.md">DOD Modeling and Simulation Standards</a>
	- DIS
	- HLA
	- TENA
	- What is standardized?
	- Philosophy: partial implementations of DIS abound
3. <a href="LiveVirtualConstructive.md">Live, Virutal, Constructive</a>
   - Example DIS applications
      - Situational awareness: maps
      - Simulation interoperability
      - Virtual Worlds
      - Analysis: Recording and Playback
4. <a href="VirtualWorldIssues.md">Virtual World Issues</a>
   	- <a href="CoordinateSystems.md">Coordinate Systems</a>
   	- <A href="EntityIdentifiers.md">Identifiers</a>
   	- <a href="Networks.md">Networks</a>
   	- <a href="Timestamps.md">Timestamps</a>
   	- <a href="Latency.md">Latency</a>
   	- <A href="EntityType.md">Semantics (Entity Type, etc)</a>
   	- <a href="EntityDiscovery.md">Entity Discovery</a>
   	- <a href="Scalability.md">Scalablity</a>
   	- <A href="DeadReckoning.md">Dead Reckoning</a>
   	- <A href="Gateways.md">Gateways</a>
4. <a href="DISImplementations.md">DIS Implementations</a>
5. <a href="ExchangingStateInformation.md">PDUs: Exchanging State Information</a>
	- <A href="UDPSockets.md">UDP Socket Programming</a>
	- <a href="EntityStatePDUs.md">Sending State Updates with Entity State PDUs</a>
	- <a href="ReceivingPDUs.md">Receiving PDUs</a>
   - <a href="Combat.md">Combat: Fire and Detonation PDUs<a/>
   - Intercom: Voice Communications
   - Electronic Warfare
   - <a ref="PDUBundling.md">Bundled PDUs</a>
6. A Minimal DIS Networking Example
7. Technology
   - Web
      - Websockets
      - X3D
      - Unity
      - WebRTC
