## Entity Identifiers

A simulation may have hundreds or even thousands of entities in one simulation world. As a practical matter we need a way to uniquely identify every entity in the world, and before we can inform an entity that its position has been updated we need a way to uniquely identify the entity.

The Entity ID structure is used in many PDUs, any that must be used to modify or retrieve data from an entity. The ESPDU message contains a entity ID that describes the state of an entity, including its position. Being able to match the position of an entity in the DIS simulation based on the entity ID is critical. The same for entities being shot at in the combat PDUs. 

When DIS was designed a goal was for it to not have a central server. Simulations had to work out identifier issues among themselves in a distributed technique, and not by contacting a single server guaranteed to hand out a single, unique number that must be unique. 

The solution landed upon was to use a collection of three unsigned shorts that would, together, uniquely identify an entity. These three numbers are the site ID, application ID, and entity ID. 

The simulation manager can during the planning phase assign identifiers for the site and application. For example, the simulation manager can specify these values for sites:

| Site       | ID |   |   |   |
|------------|----|---|---|---|
| Norfolk    | 17 |   |   |   |
| 29 Palms   | 23 |   |   |   |
| China Lake | 42 |   |   |   |

The numbers are arbitrary, but need to be agreed upon by all simulation participants. At a range of 1 to 65,535 the number of sites can be quite large and uncrowded. (Zero for a field value is prohibited to distinguish it from a default or unset value.) The running simulation organizers specify what the values are. It's helpful to have values picked to match up with prior simulations; in other words, try not to change the DIS site value for China Lake every simulation, and see if it can be kept stable. Simulation variants are common enough that a single number can't be assumed, though.

Likewise, the simulation manager can define some arbitrary values for applications:

| Application | ID   |   |   |   |
|-------------|------|---|---|---|
| JCATS       | 82   |   |   |   |
| OneSAF      | 1337 |   |   |   |
| VBS3        | 101  |   |   |   |

As with the site ID, there is a lot of data space. Even in large simulations there may only be a couple dozen applicatons in a 
64K space.

The final value of the Entity ID triplet is the entity value.

For example, a JCATS simulation at Norfolk that creates an entity may have an entity ID of (17, 82, 4576). A VBS3 simulator at China Lake may have an entity ID of (42, 101, 8472). 

This algorithm minimizes the conflicts that may occur. Instead of selecting from a large, single ID space, simulations only need to deconflict IDs at a single site, within a single application. VBS3 does not have to communicate with OneSAF at all, nor JCATS with OneSAF anywhere. Likewise, OneSAF clients at 29 Palms need not communicate with OneSAF clients at China Lake when chosing a unique Entity ID. The only possible need for communication is multiple applications from the same vendor at the same site.

The final value of the triplet, the entity number, is often selected randomly within the range of 1 to the maximum unsigned short value, 65,535. Often simply a random selection from such a large ID space is good enough to prevent conflicts. More careful and better programmers can check to see if that entity ID has already been selected by another application at that site by looking at the IDs of messages already received and processed. There's a very small risk of conflict due to race conditions, but that seems like a low risk. A more complex solution is to write an application that provides a single server for that application at that site. 

The algorithm described above relies in part on consistent application of site and application IDs. For a single application at a single site, such as VBS3 at China Lake, coordinating site and application IDs is not as important, and these numbers can be configured in the application. 

The Entity ID design also has useful aspects. It is straightforward to eliminated all entities from China Lake; just ignore any PDU with a site ID of 42, for example. Or one can ignore all entities generated by an aircraft simulator in a tank application by not handling any entities generated by the aircraft simulators

At the time DIS was designed servers were still exotic software. In this day and age it is trivially easy to set up a web server that can provide the service of handing out unique IDs. A designer replicating DIS today would almost certainly choose this technique, but the installed base is what it is. The "no-server" philosophy of DIS does still have some benefits for interoperability. For small, simple simulations the odds are that a working interoperable simulation can be created out of the box without a server are good.
